---
layout: post
title:  "The Chaos of History"
date:   2016-05-16 12:53:38 -0500
tags: linux
excerpt: >
  We like to think that systems like human society have some predictable order,
  when in reality, history is driven by completely unpredictable random events.
---

### The man who caused history

Think of the history of the twentieth century and who is most responsible for
it. You might be thinking of world leaders like Franklin Delano Roosevelt,
Joseph Stalin, or Mao Zedong. Or perhaps you are thinking of those who invented
the technology that changed the world, such as Albert Einstein or Tim
Berners-Lee.

But I suggest a man you probably haven't heard of named Gravilo Princip.

The day started off poorly for Archduke Franz Ferdinand when three security
officials were left behind, by mistake. Then an assassin threw a bomb at his
car! But the bomb bounced off his car and the assassination failed. The
Archduke's motorcade sped away to protect him from any other assassination
attempts.

> "The Ides of March have come and I am still alive!" -- Julius Ceasar by
> William Shakespeare

Princip's realized he lost his chance, so he gave up and went to a nearby food
shop. But when the motorcade started up again, someone forgot to tell the driver
to change the route. When this was realized, the command was given to reverse,
but the transmission was jammed so the car stopped _right in front of Pincip_.

By a ridiculous stroke of luck (or misfortune, depending on your point of view),
between the security officials being left behind, the first failed assassination
attempt, the driver not knowing the route, the transmission being jammed,
Gravilo Princip shot and killed Archduke Ferdinand

### Princip's butterfly effect

As you might know, this assassination brings up long-standing tensions in
Europe, setting off World War One.

As you might know, the treaty which ended World War One involved massive war
reparations to be paid by the Germans. The German people came to resent of these
foreign powers spread, making it possible for the Nazis to come to power. Thus
begins World War Two.

As you might know, the victors of World War Two partitioned off Europe, and
while they were doing so, certain tensions among the victors emerged. This led
to the stand off of the Cold War.

So Princip brought about a series of events which caused the Cold War. Or
perhaps the Archduke's driver should be the one whom we say brought about these
events. Or perhaps the man who owned the food shop that Princip stopped at, for
if he were not there perhaps Princip would gone to a different place that wasn't
on the motorcade's route.

Some would counterargue that the Austro-Hungarian empire was already ripe for
conflict, and if not Princip, then someone else would set it off. But if it was
set off in the middle east as a result of Ottoman aggression (there was unrest
in the region ever since the Young Turk Revolution). Maybe the alignment would
have been different. Russia would not feel compelled to defend the Slavic
peoples, and maybe Russia uses this hypothetical war to seek a warm-water port,
and with the manpower of Russia weighing on the other side of the scale, the
outcome could be drastically different. The specific details of these events can
matter a lot

### False assumptions

We like to think that systems like human society have some predictable order. We
like to think that this order is affected by world leaders and important
people. We like to think that things happen for compelling reasons. But when a
world war breaks out on account of the chauffeurs wrong turn, I realize that
human society is so vastly complex and intricate that some events are just so
'out there' to be foreseen. And even in a system with so many people, sometimes
one seemingly unimportant person can have a huge effect.

I think I'm going the way of Sartre.

### Further reading

- Scientific American: [Gavrilo Princip, conspiracy theories and the fragility of cause and effect](http://blogs.scientificamerican.com/the-curious-wavefunction/gavrilo-princip-conspiracy-theories-and-the-fragility-of-cause-and-effect/)
- [Chapter 1](http://www.nytimes.com/2007/04/22/books/chapters/0422-1st-tale.html?_r=0) of 'The Black Swan' by Nassim Taleb
